He operated a bulldozer in Puerto Rico and a hotel on the West Indies. He
trained as a circus aerialist to serve three years as a semen and worked in
advertising. Now, if you think this sounds like the typical biography of an
American author, you're right. His name is Theodore Stagen, but he's not exactly
typical. He is numerous stories and novels or chiefly in the area of science
fiction or fantasy. He's one of only three writers of one all three of the major
science fiction awards, the International Fantasy Award, the Hugo and the Nebula
Awards. Mr. Stagen has been in the area attending Conclave 3, a meeting of
science fiction writers and fans sponsored by the Eastern Michigan University
Science of science fiction society. The Stagen let me leap-feet foremost into
this and ask you first what in your view is the major difference between science
fiction today and other types of imaginative writing. Well, essentially you're
asking me for a definition of science fiction and I have to tell you what the
outset. The nobody has yet succeeded into finding science fiction in a way that
does not leak with a possible exception of Damon Knight who said science fiction
is whatever you happen to be pointing at when you're talking about it. There are
those who claim that I have never written a science fiction story in my life.
These are the hardcore nuts and bolts, Zap Guns, Space Flight, Hard Chemistry,
Hard Biology, Divernd, they don't feel that science fiction is science fiction
without it. Are gimmick. That's right. Good science fiction has first of all I
think to be good fiction. Good fiction is people. A lot of science fiction does
lack that particular quality. Those qualities of compassion and of love and of
internal growth and so on where the person is the most important thing. Good
fiction is the interaction between people and people or the interaction between
people and ideas. If you're interested about an idea only, you might have
something very compelling but it's a tracked, it isn't a story. And so I really
start from there and this is why as I say I have been accused by the hard course
science fiction addicts of not writing real science fiction at all. Yet I have
done a lot about spaceflight and about biology and about evolution and so on.
Well I sometimes wonder, a friend's a radio like Donald Bartholomey,
is not so very far. No, some ways from science fiction. This is a very
interesting thing. Science fiction is coming out of its own special ghetto which
is live for about 40 years. There's an interesting thing about people who
survive ghetto living. They come out strong because if they're going to survive
at all, they have to be a little bit stronger. And I think you'll find a larger
percentage of good writing and of really fascinating, good inventive thinking in
the area of science fiction than you'll find it anywhere else. You see it
exploding all around you now. In 1965 there were two courses in science fiction,
one in Pennsylvania and one in eastern New Mexico. This year there are close to
3,000 and one of my endeavors that recently has been teaching teachers teaching
symposium of teachers science fiction. Because with 3,000 courses there's
anybody to teach it without taking a special course. Or what they end up doing
is teaching writing really essentially. And there's really nothing wrong with
that. Now there's a snob situation involved here too. Vladimir Navikov's last I
think it was his last novel called Ada. And it's an alternate universe story and
was the Germans won the first World War. It is definitely a science fiction
story. Nobody calls Navikov a science fiction writer. Kurt Wannigot Jr refuses
to be called a science fiction writer. He's a faded or a fictive sales. And what
do you got a man like Thomas Pension writing? Gravity's name is very much like
science fiction. It certainly is. And in the right or V is to pinch on. Which
also was science fiction. So Dars' last thing is very highly touted literary
writing. It's right here when I novel about the London and the future. That's
right. Gains the aim is with whom I violently disagree on most points. It did
make a very, very good one. When he said that the reaction of the so-called
serious critic and the public at large is, Hey, this is science fiction. It
can't be good. Or hey, this is good. It can't be science fiction. You have
stated elsewhere that you try to alter your style constantly. I wonder about
that. Don't you think that every author and consciously identifies himself
through a style, what he does all of. Not every author. It's true you can get an
offer along the literary business by developing a style and being invented by
the Hemingway did it. For example, Bradbury is a perfect example. But you know,
with a little bit of study and some natural talent, you can sit down and write
one paragraph of perfect Hemingway. One paragraph of perfect Steinbeck. But
would you prefer to be identified as yourself as, as, as, as, as, as, as, as,
for a while than rather than Bradbury or Hemingway or who. Anyway, yeah, but do
you see, I think that that in ways of limitation. There is a distinction between
something which is original and something which is unique. Uh, something as
original is that something can be done the first time and once people see how
it's done, Everybody can do it. Mickey Spelaine was in that sense in original.
As soon as he did, what he did by, uh, hundreds of writers started to do the
same thing. and Hemingway also was saving a Stein back to a degree, even
Kippling, and Robert Lewis Stevenson had a very distinctive style, H.W. H.W.
Hager. But just try to write a paragraph and identify a paragraph of Samuel R.
Delaney, for example, a science fiction writer of the highest caliber. When he
writes Black and Ghetto, it is the real thing. When an novel people are
discussing modern American poetry, they do it in the idiom of William Carlos
Williams, and he knows what he's talking about. He can change the whole texture
and style of what he's saying. And this is a quality that I admire very, very
much indeed. You get bogged down sometimes however in the attempt to change your
style. No, it's just not natural. Not particularly. I guess it's, I have a good
ear. And I'm more interested in people than in anything else. And I listen to
people. And I report either what it is they say or what it is I wish they had
said. But in the way they say it. And of course eliminating the earth and us and
that you're in a crossing. If you've ever read, and I know you have, of course
in your business, you would have a type transcript of a speech terrible. It's
just awful. You've also been quoted as saying that writing is a way of getting
even with people. Now that sounds very pessimistic, misinsropic. And you're
definitely not that sort of person yourself. What did you mean by that? Well, I
think this is true really of all writers, particularly writers who write, who
take their craft seriously. And yet often unbeknownst to the writer himself, he
is in that sense getting even. Getting even is not necessarily a vengeful thing.
Sometimes it's an attempt to understand why you were hurt. Why did this person
hurt me? Is your puzzle, your bewildered. You write a story and before you know
it there's a character in who has been hurt in the same way. And from the
narrative, even if it's a subplot or a subsidiary line in the story, a reason
for that hurt evolves, you begin to understand better. Why you were hurt and
perhaps you're recognizing that the fact you deserve to be hurt in that
instance. So it isn't particularly a vengeful thing of getting even. It's a
question of understanding your fellow human beings. I assume that you've
developed some fairly strong opinions, beliefs over the years, whether it be in
the area of society or politics or whatever. Do you consciously utilize these
beliefs in your stories attempt to grind a certain ax? Let's say. I think rather
than trying to persuade anybody else to my way of thinking, I continually
attempt to crystallize my own thinking. If there's a flaw in its logic, if
there's a prejudice, if there's an unthought conclusion, it becomes open for
grabs. And one of my characters is a big example.
I expose his bigotry. I mean, I pursue his logic until it becomes ridiculous. Or
I do analogies of people. I remember I wrote a story one time about essentially
about Joseph McCarthy. It was a parallel story. It was cast in the future dealt
with other planets in space, flight, and so on. But I felt very strongly about
that at the time. And I had to figure out what it is that the man was doing. Why
was he doing what he was doing? I aside from him, of course, he was after a
certain amount of power. And there was that within which demanded a lot of
public attention. But those things are basically superficial. Why did he want
public attention? Why did he want power? What was his motivations there? And so
the character was historical Mr. Costello Hero. I went right down to the netty
grid. He finally, why a man does a thing like that. Joe McCarthy and so he was a
very fascinating man. He had two sets of realities. One of them was the one that
stood up in front of the microphones and waived paper in his hands and said, I
hold in my hand 240 names of communist and the state department. And another,
but naive, kind of almost childlike. I remember when episode was writing an
elevator with Richard Rovere, a reporter who did great deal of work on him. And
Dean Acheson, a man he had virtually destroyed stepped into the elevator. And
McCarthy said, Hey, Dean, how you've been? And I'm very friendly way. Acheson's
lives got white, his ears got red. Elevator stopped and he got out. And McCarthy
turned Richard Rovere and said, Hey, what's the matter with him? Has he mad at
me? And that was, I mean, said in real innocence and absolutely innocence,
there's a, there's a part missing in people like that. See, I'm not holding him
up as a devil at all. But it's a very, very fascinating kind of human being.
It's just a story to an accursed me that a great deal of science fiction writing
is is a negativeistic in a way because so many stories deal with utopias and how
they fail, but they aren't real utopias. They are ideal societies. I have
thought of something, not many people seem to have thought about utopias. You
see, let me go back to something like this, the cells in your body are
different. At this moment, they were when you walked into the studio. There's a
perpetual growth and change within you and with anything that's alive. And for
that matter, the planet that we're on, it's started in some coal-lasting gases
and it's going to end in a, a bunch of cinders. And the process between us, too,
has not stopped. We're sitting on an island of granite, a float on a sea or hot
mush on a planet which is in motion around its primary. This sun itself is in
motion in the galaxy. The galaxies are all tunneling around in and amongst each
other, even the space between us in kind of a turmoil. If you're at timescale as
large enough, you can see the whole thing boiling. The only unnatural practice
that I can think of, truly unnaturally practice is to stop for a living thing to
just stop. And yet there is that about human beings which makes them want to
stop. Now we are, where you mentioned utopias, virtually without exception, the
utopia is a static situation. You have your own self-tortive goal for everything
is all neat and all the buildings that build around the lake and all the, they
all have ten stories and, you know, and the people move back and forth and not
in smile each other and love each other a bunch. But there's no more beyond
that. Maybe internal expansion and I can't knock that. I mean, there's people
perhaps are learning more and experiencing more within themselves. Nevertheless,
virtually all utopias are playtop, run on up, have this quality of being
perfected instruments like pyramids, like the Egyptian pyramids, finished with a
single stone on top. Well, life isn't like that. People aren't like that. If I
were to design a utopia, it would be one of dynamic equilibrium rather than
static. It would be the kind of equilibrium that a girl has when it flies. It
has to be in motion in order to remain a lot. All life is like that. There are
tenancy to become pessimistic about the future. Not as long as, as I say, we can
combat this, this, this hunger for stasis that I think is the human being's
greatest disease. He wants it locked in and it's better what you see in the
magazine is diamonds or not forever. They really are not forever. Nothing is
forever in that sense. And if you can recognize that and design your life and
your politics and your morality and a sense of ongoing and evolution and growth
and deeper understanding, but always perpetual movement. Then I think you have
something like a utopian situation, but it's a dynamic utopia you see. And you
know, progress in quotation marks has gotten a bad name at many times in the
past. Most of the people who don't like the way progress is going, I mean, there
was probably a lot of lip polling about coming down out of the trees, they're
out of the caves. It's good enough for my grandfather. It's good enough for you,
kid. Many people, I suppose, they are writers mainly, or all those curious about
the habits of another writer and the possibility of having writing blocks and we
get going and the does he have periods of total letter G and so forth? Do you
have any secrets? I am the world's greatest expert on writers' blocks. I had
once the last for six years, six years. And you know, when you get wives and
children and like that, and the rents do and so on, and your income is writing
and you drive for six years. It's pretty rough. Very rough. I think I've entered
a say I can cure virtually anybody's writers' block. Because it's something that
I haven't evolved myself in very profound. I cannot always cure my own, but I
had a profound insight one time. I had a major breakdown in 1965. I mean, I
really came to be. It was a close thing. Fortunately, I fell into the hands of
somebody who, ideally, he was a surgeon fan. This guy, I swear, he'd read more
surgeon than surgeon, he'd written, he could quote old paragraphs, which is more
than I can do. And he pointed out in that six-year period of the work that I had
done before that. And the work that had done subsequent to that period. Because
I was one of the things that was wrong with me. I was being whaling those six
years, six years as an off-town yet appeal, it's a prize, or make it have a
million bucks. And those six years had gone by and everybody was scarred by it.
And so on. And I was mourning that fact in this the last years, and that there
would never come back. And so on. He pointed out to me that the quality of work
that I had done before that, and what was done afterwards. Not only the quality
of the content, he said what I had done before were essentially entertainment.
And nobody's knocking entertainment. We need them like we need vitamins. But the
stuff that I was doing afterwards was of a totally different assort. He called
them therapy stories, well he was a therapist, and that was his particular bias.
But it's true. Virtually everything in our written sense then has been about
people who were sick and get well, or people who are well and get better, and
whatever they are. Well, obviously you were growing during that time. That's the
point that he made. He said, you are mourning the fact that the work stopped. He
said the work didn't stop. The page has stopped coming out. But he said, that's
a triviality. The work continued. And he said, this is documented by the work
you've done. And that was a huge thing for me to find out. I mean, I'm never
going to get depressed about that again. And if I go through a period where no
page has come out for weeks or even months, I'm not particularly concerned. I
find it when I'm writing, I'm typing in some strange ways all done. And suddenly
I sit down and I write it for 30 hours and I'm typing until I fall a recidelift.
I produced 21,000 word novel out without getting up from a desk. But you know,
in 18 or 20 hours. And it's all done. And oddly enough, the internal structure
of this story, the subsidiary plots, the subsidiary of characters themselves,
they're placing of climax and denuma. And so it's all there. It's all finished.
You're interrupted me in the middle and asked me, how is this going to end? And
in what way I wouldn't be able to tell you. That's a peculiar internal thing. Do
you turn to other kinds of stories as relief let's say from science fiction? Not
as relief, but often another
vehicle will say what I want to say better. And as result, I've written real
minds as every, I have book Western stories. And then I can't anybody else's
Western story, but there was a legitimate Western story. And yeah, I've written
a made great way, well, we're back to the same thing where the addict will say
that this dirt and doesn't write real science fiction. No, essentially, I write
people's dirt. You've worked in scenarios for films, have you know? Yeah, we're
not the West Coast originally, 12 years ago, right, it's an arttrec. And about
six I sold four, an air two, which is pretty well-par. And of course, and those
two have been showcased very well in the mean thing. They were very successful.
They were in Star Trek addicts out there. They were a mock time. For those who
are very familiar with Star Trek, which shows where these are. Yeah, a mock time
was one of them. The other was called Sure Leave. And they've been very
successful. Have you worked on full length feature films? Not specifically, no.
One of my stories killed those, which is, I think one of the best stories I ever
wrote. I mentioned, I'd write up for six years. In the middle of that six-year
period, for nine days, I could write, and I wrote killed those, and it's right
first draft exactly where you read it all the way through. And then it shot down
again. And it was put by universal pictures. And they made a movie of the week
out of it. And it is a dog. It is awful. I mean, really. You can't fault the D9,
here's the caterpillar, D9, which is marvelous machine. I'm going to love it
with those big machines for years anyhow. I'm still a class I hear you're
equipment opportunity. As a person who deals with the imagination, imaginative
things, do you think that this emphasis on the visual interpreting all these
stories through pictures is detrimental to writing of science fiction? It's hard
to say, as a man called Byron Price in New York, who is getting out a whole line
of what they call graphics, graphics novels, which are as much pictures as they
are as they are prose. And they have something to be said for them. But I think
it's essentially a super comic book, that's right. But it's another kind of
fiction. I mean, just as there are kinds of music, there's chamber music,
there's symphonic music, and there's rock in this country. And each conveys to
its audience, what its audience really wants. And so I don't know, I am afraid
that people are going to start reading, which is an interesting thing. You know,
back in the 15th and 16th century, if a guy worked on shoes, he put a big boot
up over his door. And if a guy is sold horses, he put a big horse up over his
door. Because people couldn't read. We know we're getting back to that. It's not
only watching television all the time, but the international science, and now
you've got a sign for the ladies' room and you got a sign for a telephone, and
you've got a sign for their baggage, pick up and so on. All these little picture
graphs. And pretty soon, we're just going to be watching the tube and looking at
pictures grass, and what price really find finished prose. It's quite of the
fact that the gimmickry is superior. Do you think we've gone downhill from Star
Trek to Battle Star Galactic? Battle Star Galactic has suffered primarily from
the ripoff. I mean, they take things that are guaranteed successes and redo them
in the Galactic format. For example, Jane and I saw Shane on Battle Star
Galactic virtually down the line.
And this is what they do. Whatever has been successful, and they put it in the
science, fiction, format, and it works. Star Trek was its own highly original
thing. The success of Star Trek, the people tried to imitate it and fail. The
main reason they fail is that Star Trek was started and promoted and still is by
a man who had ideals. He really did. Gene Roddenberry believes in such things as
patriotism in American, democratic ideal, and the equality of the sexists, and
the equality of the races. He believes in these things very deeply, his own
personality, and in every episode of Star Trek, he exploited and expressed these
beliefs. And that's really what we each people. It wasn't so much Captain Kirk
and Mr. Spock's point of view, it was the underlying faith that had his own
idea. A lot of people who say that that's corny and a ho-hom and array, that's
wrap ourselves in the American flag. It isn't that it goes very much, even that.
People really do want something to believe in. Space 1999 and even Galactic,
don't really seem to give much of a damn about anything except getting this show
on the year next season. But Gene Roddenberry believed very profoundly in these
things using Star Trek to express them from the visual to other art forms. I
know you are an appreciator of music. Do you sometimes feel that they're wish
that you were a composer rather than a writer, could you express some of your
ideas better in some other form? Either as a composer or an artist? There are
things that you can say in music that you can't say in words.
I am certainly thought of John Carl Mennotti who wrote the medium. As somebody
wrote him once as a triple threat artist, he was a director and it was a
composer and he was a libretist. And he said, oh no, not triple. Double. And
interviewer said, when you mean double, he said, well, yes, I'm a director, but
he said as far as the rest of it, the words come to me in music. To him they
were all the same thing. It's a very interesting way of expressing it. But
sometimes music alone, there's a guitar a2d by Fernando Sour, which someday I'm
going to write lyrics too, but it just takes me apart and listen to. I think the
greatest piece of music ever composed is the Pasecagli and few you can see mine
by Bach. It's architecture in such an extraordinary way. One's up with
establishes a 15 note theme and simply repeat it over and over again, but we're
rephrasing it and throwing it to various parts of the orchestra, whether he
composed it with four and orchestra or not at the beside point. And winding up
with a monumental discord, everything is there. He's just a great crashing 115
piece of chord that leans over sideways about to fall over. Then he backs off
and it gives it to your in-seat major, having written in-seemime at the whole
time. And you just go away feeling good and I don't know how you do that in
prose. I really don't. You have a new collection of stories that's just out.
Yeah, it's called Vision's Invisionaries. It's from down. It's the first of five
works that Dell is getting out within the next year, 18 months. Are both of
these short story collections? No, two of them are novels. Two of them are the
other three or or you find it more difficult to write a full length work than a
short story. It depends on the idea that's pushing you. Often you'll start to
write a short story and expands itself into a novel that or even into a novel.
That's interesting how that happens to. Often you get a very powerful idea and
it plunges you right into it and you keep working it and working it until it's
done. You find that it needs to be cut and what you cut is the original idea
that started the whole thing because it's taking the bitnits teeth and run off
in another direction. The suggestion has been delightful talking with you. Thank
you so much for joining us. Thank you. And it's been a pleasure to talk to you.
You have some fine questions. You really do. Thank you.